I first became aware of the term technical debt during the recent (2008) financial crisis. I think there is an analogy between the term and the crisis when attempting to take control of the quality of an established code-base.

The UK government had responded to a lack of confidence by creating rescue packages to guarantee the banks lending and to invest in them. This was justified by saying they were "too big to fail". They were seen as too big and interconnected, so their bankruptcy would cause too much disruption to the economy.

The banks had become so large because they merged with others. Often they'd offered the same services and so after merging had computer systems offering the same functionality. Consolidating them would give benefits of simplicity and integration. This happened during the pre-crisis period and in the rush for expansion they delayed tackling what might have been perceived as a technical problem. Hence a build up of technical debt.

The term itself pre-dates this and is credited to Ward Cunningham. It seems he had intended it for the inevitable and conscious debt taken temporarily in order to be productive. It's inevitable because you cannot know the best design when you start. It's conscious because you are not intentionally writing bad code. Using the financial analogy this is good debt. For instance if you want to be early to market or fund manufacturing, debt is a necessary for our economy.

However, the analogy works both ways. There is also bad debt, accumulating due to a lack of regulation (e.g. standards, reviews), inexperience and/or disregard within the organisation. Given enough work hours and a system with a long life-time, a multi-million line code-base can also become "too big to fail". Tackling this is not easy because it also likely to be interconnected. The debt makes it hard to investigate and resolve  bugs, and to add features to the system.  Even if the business identifies bad technical debt as the source of the problem, solving them can seem insurmountable.

The financial crisis resulted in economic recessions that in turn brought about a lack of confidence in several European governments to service their debt. This was often counteracted with bailouts by other members of EU. Using the technical debt metaphor the debt had become so large that improving stability of the system and adding more features had become impossible. In terms of the analogy I don't think these bailouts work as well as the government to bank ones. Like a government a company can bailout the technical debt by using its finances to employ contractors or to outsource. However, just like the financial bailouts this is a temporary solution. To grow in a sustainable way the problems must be addressed.

Government debt is often show against GDP, as of the first quarter of 2013 the UK's was at 88.1%.  So it would take 10.5 months of spending nothing to pay of the debt. Because of the unlikelihood of repaying all of government debt its usually only the budget deficit which gets referred to. This is the shortfall in tax being collected against what the government spends. This contributes to the new debt currently being accumulated. Reducing the deficit is seen as a achievable way of bring about stability.

Its just as unlikely for an entire development department to do nothing but pay off technical debt for 10.5 months.  As technical debt is subjective I think its harder to measure, and so is quantifying the effort to repay it. So if there has been an accumulation of long-term technical debt, maybe the sustainable solutions is to instead focus on reducing technical deficit. We still need to recognise good debt, take advantage of it and repay it quickly. As the ability to avoid new bad technical debt increases those doing so can reach point of surplus and start to erode accumulated debt in the areas they work on.

In practical terms I think what's needed is the ability to measure (analysis/reporting), regulation (standards/review), the right balance of experience and a culture of pride in what is produced.